Now, most people don't fail to start
because they're lazy. They overthink
because they think they need to know
everything before they get started. But
look at this graph. This is everything
you could know about a topic. But this
little bit over here, this is what you
actually need to know to get started. In
this episode of Book Club, the ongoing
series where for the last 5 years, I've
been sharing my thoughts and
recommendations from some of my favorite
books. We are diving into Pat Flynn's
Lean Learning, a system designed to help
you stop overthinking, get unstuck, and
actually make progress with whatever you
want to do. All right, so let's start
with key point number one. And for that
I would like to draw your attention to
this little chart on page 33 of the
book. Now this is a chart that I wish
could be seared into the brains of so
many friends of mine and also so many
people who I speak to who attend events
where if I'm doing a talk or something
like a lot of people will have the
question of like I know I want to do
think X whether thing X is starting a
business or starting a side hustle or
starting a YouTube channel or I mean
it's normally those three things that
people come to me for advice for but
they are stuck in this mode of like
endless research. They keep on trying to
research more and more and more stuff.
And I think what they don't realize is
that actually you need a very small
amount of information to get started.
And once you get started, that is when
once you're taking step after step,
that's when you can kind of be doing all
the research and doing all the learning.
But it all comes from a foundation of
actually taking action and doing the
goddamn thing. And in fact, Pat
literally has a subtitle, JFGS. Just
get started. I clicked the end
of my pen and started writing that down
in my notebook. Stop writing down.
There's nothing more to write. Come on,
just do it already. I had never
seen my business coach this upset
before. In fact, this was the first time
I'd ever heard him swear. I guess I
pushed him to the boiling point. The Pat
talks about hiring this business coach
called Jeremy. And he's been having like
weekly meetings with Jeremy trying to
get his first business off the ground.
We've been meeting like this every other
week at the same Cheesecake Factory for
a few months, but this time Jeremy was
pissed. I closed my notebook and locked
eyes with him because I knew he wasn't
finished with me yet. Pat, he continued,
"You have a whole notebook of
strategies, but you still haven't
launched your book yet. you're helping
nobody with a notebook full of plants.
And so Pat was procrastinating for
absolutely ages before starting his
first business back in 2008, which was
like an ebook for architects or
something like that. And he writes,
"From the dozens of blogs and podcasts I
was subscribed to at the time to the
business books I purchased from Barnes &
Noble because I already had read half
the material in the store. I was always
in search mode. On the surface, I was
searching for some magical answer, a
Eureka moment, you could say, some piece
of content that would make my new
endeavor a lot easier. But in
retrospect, all I was doing was
searching for something to hide behind.
And that something was learning. I think
this is a really solid point that more
people need to hear. If you are a smart
person, which you probably are if you
watch this channel, you know you're
probably very intelligent. You're also
probably very good-looking. Then you're
probably used to trying to do things
right. You and I, we were taught in
school and we were conditioned from a
very young age that we had to do the
right things. And if you got a failure
mark in an exam or, you know, if you're
like some of us and you got anything
less than 100% in the exam, that would
feel bad. And so the solution that we as
kids realize is that we're not going to
do anything unless we are fully certain
that that thing is going to do well and
we substitute learning for action. And
this is what school and sometimes even
our parents literally conditions us to
do from a young age. But the key point
here which I really like is when you
become an adult and you're out in the
real world, especially when you are
trying to do something like start a
business or put yourself out there in
any capacity or do anything creative,
there is no rule book for the thing.
There is no checklist and examiner
report and syllabus and official
curriculum that you need to follow. And
if you just learned enough things then
of course you would get 100% in the
exam. And the thing with learning is
that learning feels super productive. It
feels like you know watching a YouTube
video or reading a business book or
whatever that feels like it's you making
productive progress towards doing the
thing like starting the business or
whatever. But if we come back to this
graph you know all of this is the
information that you could know about a
given topic. And this is just all the
information you need to get started
which is a way smaller amount of
information than most people think. And
I found myself thinking of an analogy
while I was reading the book. So imagine
learning how to ride a bicycle. You
probably know how to ride a bicycle
right now. How much information is there
to know about riding a bike? There's all
of this stuff around like the gear and
the suspension and like the wheels and
the, you know, the foamy bits you put on
your bum and your like shorts. There is
all of this information out there. But
if you don't yet know how to ride a
bike, it would be really dumb to try and
consume all the information that a tour
to France competitive cyclist needs to
learn to be ahead of the game. The
information you had was probably from
someone who taught you how to ride a
bike that was like basically sit on,
maybe stick the training wheels on and
just keep pedaling and maybe they hold
onto the bike a little bit so that you
don't feel the fear of falling off and
then you get the hang of it and yeah,
maybe you fall over a couple of times.
But obviously that process was necessary
for you to learn the skill of riding the
bike and then if you want to take
cycling more seriously once you know how
to ride a bike at that point you can
then research the next level which is
like okay cool what's a fancier bike and
then like how do I aerodynamically like
position myself and then how do I get
those shoe cliponyy thingies that can
clip onto the pedals? And the reason I'm
so passionate about this is because I
see this question so often amongst the
people that I speak to, which is that
you're doing basically the equivalent of
trying to consume Olympic cycling level
information before you have even learned
how to ride a bike. And you think if you
consume more and more and more
information, at some point you'll
magically feel ready and able to do the
thing. But you're never going to feel
ready to do the thing. Any new thing
that you try and do is always going to
involve a little bit of a leap of faith.
Now, if one of the things that you're
looking to take action on is potentially
anything to do with being a creator and
or starting your own business, then
you're definitely going to want to check
out Poppy AI, who are very kindly
sponsoring this video. Poppy AI is the
first and as far as I know, only visual
AI tool out there. It's sort of like if
Miro or Fick Jam and ChatgBT had a baby,
which is very cool. Me and my team have
been using Poppy AI for the last few
months now and has been super helpful
for our content creation process and
also for our process of creating sales
assets and ads and stuff for our
products. And the way Poppy works is
that you can import pretty much any kind
of content into its like board thing. So
you can import YouTube videos or
Instagram posts or Tik Tok videos or
voice memos or PDFs and you just copy
and paste the links and drag and drop
them into the board and then you can
connect them to a chat interface. So the
chat interface works like the ones
you're familiar with like exactly how
chat GBT chat interface works. But
crucially you can connect the sources
that you've added so that they are taken
into account when you're doing the chat.
It includes all of the best AI models
like claude 3.7 sonnet and gpt 40 and
all of the others. But what's really
powerful is that you can also then
collaborate with your team in real time
and so everyone can be on the same board
working with the AI together. The way we
use it is for example, we take all of
our top performing Instagram reels or
Tik Toks. We drag them into the board
and then we connect it all up to the
chat interface so that we can
understand, okay, what was it about this
content that made it perform compared to
the others? What are some new ideas for
new content that we could shoot based on
what's done well? It's also super
helpful for like planning our ads. So we
can bring in ads that other people have
made and then we can use that to create
ads for our own products like Voice Pal
or a YouTuber course or anything like
that. And right now, over 3,000 content
creators, entrepreneurs, and marketers
use Poppyai to save over a 100 hours a
month in their processes. If you'd like
to check it out, then head over to
getpoppy.ai/ Aliabdal or scan the QR
code on screen and you'll get $25 off
the subscription with the code Ali at
checkout. So, thank you so much Poppyai
for sponsoring this video. And let's get
back to it. Let's say you're one of the
many people out there who's like not yet
started the thing because you don't feel
ready enough. You're overthinking the
thing. You're over planning. You're
overarning. And maybe you're consuming
this amount of information. Like really,
all you needed was just a tiny amount of
information to get started. But because
you didn't feel ready, you were watching
all these YouTube videos. You were
reading all these books. You were like
listening to all these podcasts. You,
you know, you were doing all these
things. And I'm going to label this
information you consume because of fear.
You are scared of doing the thing. And
what you're doing by consuming all this
information is that you are hoping it
will reduce your fear. When you're in
school and you are scared of taking the
exam because you want to do well and you
know you haven't studied enough, you
know that the solution to that fear
would have been to study harder for the
exam. If you had studied harder, if
you'd consumed more information, you
would have been less afraid of the exam.
But the thing to realize is that when
you're trying to do anything creative,
when you're trying to start your
business, when you're trying to make
money on the internet, whatever the
things that you're working on, the
pattern that you learned in school,
which is that more information equals
less fear, actually does not hold true.
And I think all of this extra
information tends to hold people back
rather than facilitate their journey
into the business. And some people might
be thinking, yeah, well, if I get more
information, it reduces my risks of
failure. If I learn more about how to
start a business, then, you know, most
businesses fail, so I'm less likely to
fail. And again, I would gently suggest
that that is not actually true. Yes,
there is a small amount of minimum
viable information you need to start a
business. But usually what happens and
the pattern that I've seen play out
repeatedly is that the more information
you consume about the thing, the more
you learn about the thing before taking
action, that extra information actually
often will put you off from doing the
thing.
Now there is a graph here that you might
be familiar
with. So when you think about starting
anything, you generally feel pretty
positive about the thing. Oh, you know,
I could start a YouTube channel. I could
start a business. This is uninformed
optimism. So you start off with
uninformed optimism. You start doing the
thing and over time you realize very
quickly when when you start doing the
thing that actually the thing is harder
than you thought it would be and you
enter this kind of dip area. There is a
wonderful book by Seth Goden with the
title of the dip that you should check
out as well. Now what a lot of people
will do is that they'll start something.
They'll do it for a bit. They'll get to
the point where it starts to feel hard.
They'll get to the dip and then they'll
think that they suck because they find
the thing really hard and then they will
give up on the thing and go right back
to the beginning and pursue a different
opportunity. These are the people that
start 18 different businesses and never
see any one of them through. These are
the people that maybe start a YouTube
channel and they keep on switching
niches because they're like, "Ah, it's
not working. It's not working. It's not
working. It's not working." Now, it's
unfortunate for these sorts of people
because when they feel the thing getting
hard, they end up quitting and just
starting again, which means they never
actually see anything through to
completion. But there is a category of
person that's even more sad than this
because you know what that person does?
You know, at least what they did is they
got started and then they gave up.
Whereas the overthinkers and the
overarners amongst us, and this used to
be me back in the day, thankfully it's
not me anymore, will do so much research
that in the process of doing the
research, they will realize, "Oh my
goodness, this thing is harder than I
thought it would be." And they give up
on doing the thing before even taking
that first step. But the thing is, for
most interesting and therefore uncertain
things in life, it's actually very
useful to start out with uninformed
optimism, it's useful to not really
realize how hard the thing is going to
be when you're just getting started. And
it's useful to just take the action
because the more action you take, the
more momentum you have in the thing and
then you're able to sort of push through
the difficult bits. When you speak to
people who have started and scaled a
successful business and you ask them,
"Hey, if you'd known how hard it was
going to be, would you have gotten
started?" And they often say, "If I had
known how hard it was going to be, it
probably would have put me off from
starting in the first place. So, I'm
glad I didn't know how hard it was going
to be because by the time I'd started,
that gave me the momentum to see the
thing through and actually complete it.
And now on the other side of that,
they're living a life they absolutely
love. They've got freedom. They've got
fulfillment. They've got like
flexibility. They can do what they want.
They don't have to do things they don't
want to do. But that goal of the freedom
to be able to do what you want and the
freedom to be able to say no to things
you don't want to do. That is a goal
that the only real way to get there is
by doing difficult and uncertain things
where the probability of success is not
guaranteed because if the probability of
success was guaranteed, everyone would
be doing the thing. The more you
research the thing, the more likely you
are to become more scared of doing the
thing and less likely to take action
beyond the point of minimum viable
learning. Now, if we ask people like
what sort of thing they're actually
scared of, usually two different sort of
categories of of fear will come in for
whatever the thing is. One category is
I'm afraid of making mistakes and I'm
afraid of failing at the thing. And the
second one is I am afraid people will
laugh at me. It sounds a bit trit to say
it that way, but essentially the reason
you haven't yet done the thing that
you've been wanting to do is because on
some level you are afraid that some
people will laugh at you. I was afraid
of public humiliation when I first
started my YouTube channel. I made like
15 videos on my YouTube channel before I
posted about it at all on like Facebook
and Instagram and like, you know,
letting my friends and family know. I
was just doing it in silence because I
was so afraid that people were going to
laugh at me. And then I posted a link on
Facebook and I realized no one actually
cared. No one was laughing at me. No one
was looking at me. Yeah, some people in
medical school were like, "Oh, put the
camera away. Like, what's wrong with
you?" Um, but those same people, like
after after the channel became
successful, were all like clamoring to
be in videos and stuff. And so, when I
was feeling this fear of public
humiliation and public criticism, you
know, there were a couple of books that
helped. I read show your work by Austin
Cleon which I have somewhere here which
is a really good book that really helps
with this and this is something Pat
talks about in his book as well where he
was held back from starting his first
business because of the fear of what
other people will think and I feel
really passionate about this because
that was literally a thing that held me
held me back for like 7 years from 2010
to 2017 that's how long it took me to
start my YouTube channel despite
thinking about it for 7 years because
ultimately I was thinking I don't want
this to be bad I don't want this to suck
I need to do more research I need more
gear and so if I can shortcut that
process for anyone by watching this
video you know like reading this book
for example there's other books like you
know the the war of art by Steven
Presfield or show your work by Austin
Cleon. These are all books from people
that have recognized that this fear
thing holds so many of us back and it
really needn't do that. And so to end
this point, I would like to leave you
with a journaling prompt, which is in
what ways am I allowing information
gathering to prevent me from taking
action. If that resonates with you at
all, then I'd love to hear in a comment
down below what that is for you. Anyway,
let's move on to key point number two,
which is mistakes. So, we've talked
about how basically no one gives a
about you anyway, and so like you don't
need to worry about them laughing at you
cuz they probably won't care. But the
other big fear people have is the fear
of failure and the fear of making
mistakes. The fear of I don't want to
waste time doing something that might
not work. The fear of I want to sort of
preemptively avoid failure. I don't want
to make mistakes and and all of this
sort of stuff. And again, this is an
attitude that's trained into us by
school where if you make mistakes on an
exam, you literally lose points and
those points cost you a grade and that
grade costs you a university place which
costs you a good job in theory. And so
all of these systems of conditioning
that we get when we're younger are all
about teaching us to avoid making
mistakes. And there is a nice little
quote from here. As John Lee Dumass, a
friend and host of the popular podcast
Entrepreneurs on Fire once said, "You
have to be a disaster before you become
the master." Or as Pat likes to say to
people who are trying to build a YouTube
channel or any kind of creative thing,
you have to be cringe before they binge.
Now, this is an idea that you're
probably familiar with, right? Like if
you're at this point in the video,
you've probably heard the idea that like
you should reframe failure as a learning
opportunity and you should learn from
your mistakes and all that all that kind
of stuff. But again, you know, common
sense is not common practice. And it's
it and it's very different for us to
intellectually know something and then
to also like embody the thing in our own
like mind, heart, body, soul such that
we actually take action based on this
supposed knowledge that we have. Now,
there's a bunch of useful stuff in the
book that you should definitely check
out. But I'm going to tell you about the
way that I kind of got over my own fear
of making mistakes. And this was
actually because of a lecture that we
had in our second year of med school
that was all about neuroscience. And it
was this argument that our brains are
essentially a prediction machine. The
brain gets very good at trying to
predict what's going to happen in the
world around it. So let's say I drop
this pen. Your brain intuitively
understands gravity and understand that
when the pen is here and I drop it, it's
going to do that, right? Easy enough.
But if instead you were to see the pen
doing this, that would be pretty
surprising. Your brain registers
surprise because reality has not matched
with with its expectations. So the brain
makes a prediction or an expectation
about what's going to happen. Then
reality happens and the brain registers
surprise if reality did not match its
prediction. Now the crucial insight is
that all of learning happens when you
experience surprise. If reality matches
your brain's prediction of what's going
to happen, there is no signal to learn
anything because that would just be it
would be a nightmare. If every time you
saw the world conforming to what you
thought it would, your brain would be
completely overloaded with all the
information that's always around you. So
what has to happen is that in order for
you to learn, you have to be surprised.
I.e. reality must not conform to your
expectations for learning to happen. Now
this leads us to an interesting problem
because if we want to learn and we know
that learning is when reality does not
conform to our expectations then really
learning almost by definition happens
when we make mistakes. If you do
something and then things go according
to plan you're not going to learn
because your brain does not register
that as a signal of surprise. But if you
do something and then things don't go
according to plan you register that as a
mistake. Your brain registers that as
surprise and then you end up learning
from that experience. Now, when you
experience that surprise of like reality
not conforming to expectations, you
could think, "Yay, I'm learning
something." Or you could do what some
people think and their minds naturally
go to, which is, "I'm a failure. I
started my first business. It did not go
as well as I thought it would.
Therefore, I'm a failure." That is a
thought process you could have. Or you
could have the thought process of, I
started my first business, it didn't go
as I thought it would, but through the
process, I've learned a bunch of things.
And so, the next time I start a
business, I hopefully won't make those
same mistakes. It's exactly the same
situation. you started a business that
hasn't worked out. But in one, your mind
tells you that you're a failure and you
believe that thought. And in the other
one, you don't believe the thought that
you're a failure and and you tell
yourself, you know what, I'm going to
learn from the experience. And then in
the book, there's a bunch of really good
stuff around like making mistakes leads
to you understanding the thing better,
leads to more resilience, and how
mistakes lead to innovation, and how
basically every good thing happens when
we embrace making mistakes. The final
thing I would like to talk about is what
Pat Flynn calls the lean learning
method. And I really like this, and it
sounds really simple, and it's going to
sound trit maybe, but I think again,
common sense is not common practice. And
I wish more people followed this kind of
process when they were starting new
things, starting businesses and all this
sort of stuff. It's also a lesson that I
need to learn for myself because I also
have a tendency to overthink and over
analyze stuff. Where is it? All right.
So this is the lean learning method.
Step one, identify the next step in your
journey, whatever your journey is. Step
two, gather the minimum amount of
information required to complete that
step. And I have highlighted minimum
amount of information in green because
that is the thing that like I wish more
people knew. It's like the goal is
minimum viable information, not maximum
possible information. And then step
three, take action and complete the
step. And I've highlighted take action
in red because again, that is the thing
that more people need to hear. Honestly,
if there's one thing you take away from
this video, if you're at at the video at
this point, and the thing that I wish I
could sear into the brain of everyone
who ever asked me this this sort of
stuff is like probably what's holding
you back is that you're trying to learn
too much stuff. And probably what's
holding you back is that you're not
taking enough action. So, we want to
sort of shift the equation from more
action and less learning rather than
more learning and less action, which is
where a lot of people who follow this
channel, you know, the smart and very
good-looking ones tend to fall into. And
then once you've done step number three,
rinse and repeat and you go back to step
number one. This is the lean learning
process that he talks about in the book.
Again, it sounds super simple. It sounds
really basic AF, right? Like what's the
next step? What's the information I need
to complete the next step? Great. I'm
going to complete the next step and then
I'm going to repeat the process. But
like honestly, this is the one one foot
in front of the other process that
literally everything in life happens
because of this kind of process of one
foot in front of the other. There are
very few things that happen where you've
got to start out by knowing everything
and by making a perfect plan and then
executing perfectly on your perfect
plan. All right, so this video has just
scratched the surface of all the stuff
in the book. If you are vibing with this
topic, if you find yourself overthinking
and overplanning and over researching
like I sometimes often do in my life and
that like I know so many of my audience
do, I would definitely recommend
checking out the book. And if you're
interested in more techniques on how to
actually take action and achieve your
goals, then you might like to check out
this video over here, which contains
like five or six evidence-based, very
easy, small, tiny things you can do to
drastically increase the chances that
you'll achieve your goals. So, thank you
so much for watching, and I'll see you
hopefully in that video.